Macronutrients (or macros) are nutrients needed in large quantities in order to provide energy to the body. As you become more invested in the world of weight training and how to prepare your body for building strength, you’ll see a lot of articles about “counting macros”. Here is a brief starter guide on what macronutrients are, what forms they can come in, and what the significance of counting them is.

There are three types on macronutrients: fats, proteins, and carbs. We’re all generally familiar with what they look like on a plate.

Fats of the non-squishy variety: Seeds, unsalted nuts, avocados, and olives. Peanut butter too. Yes, peanut butter.

Proteins of all shapes and sizes: beans, legumes, seeds, unsalted nuts, raw greens, beets

Carbs not shaped like loaves: Apples, cauliflower, carrots, brown rice, chickpeas, kidney beans, and quinoa.

The first part of calculating the appropriate macro intake is to determine the kind of physical activity you undergo each day. Don’t move around a lot? You aren’t going to require as many macros as somebody who goes to the gym for a few hours each day and has a physically demanding job. There are all sorts of macronutrient calculators out there, but here are the basics:

Wanting some gains? You’ll be more interested in 3:2:1 ratio of carbs:protein:fats. Fats of course will be slightly less than a 1 on this scale, but a calculator online can give you more precise numbers. For example, you’d want about 300g of carbs, 200g of protein, and 85g of fats. This general rule should serve to give an idea of what the exact numbers could be for you personally.

Aiming more for weight loss? You’re looking more for a 2:2:1. Another example, you’d want about 200g of carbs, 200g of protein, and 78g of fats.

It’s important to note how the carbs drop significantly while the proteins don’t budge much for weight loss. Proteins are essential for the makeup of cells and are needed in high quantity. Carbs, while useful for giving the body energy and aiding in synthesizing some amino acids, are not needed if your activity levels aren’t high enough to require them. After being broken down, if the glucose derived from carbs isn’t used, it’ll be stored as fat in the body. Obviously, that’s the opposite of the desired effect when it comes to weight loss.

So, how much of what should you consume when? A good and vague question. It all depends on your goals. This app is aimed towards weight training, so from here on, what I’ll say will be more geared towards those seeking to build muscle (as is my own goal).

Commonly enough, there seems to be an agreed upon number of 1g of protein per 1lb of bodyweight. That could be a lot, or that could be a little. Before you run out and start eating every chicken on the face of the planet, take a step back and evaluate what your goal is. What other ways could you get some extra protein in that isn’t made of powder or in the deli? Don’t leave out the carbs as well – no, they aren’t evil. Sure, you can’t be pounding cinnamon rolls and tortilla chips every day and wondering why you’ve suddenly stopped leaning out. Fats are friends too. Just keep about ten steps back and you’ll be fine.

Also, talking to an actual dietician might be in your best interest as well. There’s nothing on this app that says Dr., it just says BS (that’s a Bachelor’s of Science, by the way).

The important thing is, macro counting could really help. It may not be up your alley. Yes, counting things for some is tedious and annoying, and it also requires a food scale that measures in the metric system, of all things. But if you’re committed, it’ll be worth it. If you want to see more definition and bulk up more, or if you aren’t looking for gains but for some reason have stuck around after I basically told you to leave because I was ignoring you, counting macros could be the answer. Calculators online can give you the rough outline on where you should start, but be sure to consult quite a few. And really, be honest with yourself about activity levels and your commitment. There’s no shame in being at a sedentary job. There’s no shame to not having time for the gym six days a week, but you’re thinking three is a good start. If you like it, you’ll find ways to get more time in. Basically, there’s no shame here. Shame is dumb. Don’t do it.

Hopefully this brief article (compilation of too many google searches?) has started turning some wheels in your head about what you might be interested in doing. To macro or not to macro, it’s up to you. Do what you want! Keep your health and goals in mind – in that order.
